---
layout: post
title: Regular expression in JavaScript
published: false
---

<pre>
text = 'aa@';
regex = /(@){1,2}/
log(text.match(regex));
</pre>

In the above case if there are more than two @ then regex will not complain. regex will complain if the number of @ is 1 or 2. However
if there are 3 @ then regex is happy. If you want to enforce an upper bound then regex needs to be like this

h2. Lookahead

h3. Lookaheads can be used anywhere in the regex

Ensure that password is at least six characters long and contains at least one letter and one digit. One way to do that would be

<pre>
^(?=.*[A-Za-z])(?=.*\d)[A-Za-z0-9]{6,}$
</pre>

With explanation 

<pre>
^               -- match beginning of line
(?=.*[A-Za-z])  -- positive lookahead to ensure that there is one letter ahead somewhere.
(?=.*\d)        -- positive loook ahead to ensure that there is a digit ahead somewhere.
[A-Za-z0-9]{6,} -- there should be atleast 6 of lower case letters, upper case letters or digits
$               -- end of line
</pre>

Important thing to consider is that *lookahead assertions do not consume characters* .

If the requirement is that there should be atleast one digit, one lower case letter and one upper case letter 
and one can use other characters like dot etc too. Regex would look like this.

<pre>
^(?=.*\d)(?=.*[a-z])(?=.*[A-Z]).{6,}$
</pre>

with explanation

<pre>
^           -- Match beginning of line
(?=.*\d)    -- The following string contains a number
(?=.*[a-z]) -- The following string contains a lowercase letter
(?=.*[A-Z]) -- The following string contains an uppercase letter
.{6,}       -- Match at least 6, as many as desired of any character
$           -- Match end of line


/Win(?=98)/ matches 'Win' only if 'Win' is followed by '98'.
</pre>

find all the urls in a string. However reject urls that are ending with .dtd. Notice the url should be ending with .dtd and url like http://a.dtd.google.com should pass.

<pre>
 /(htdtp:\/\/(?![^\s]*\.dtd\b)[^\s]*)/
</pre>

h2. Negative lookahead

/Win(?!98)/ matches Win2000 but rejects Win98
