---
layout: post
title: EventsInIndia.com is live
---
I had previously mentioned that I was working on <a href="http://eventsinindia.com/">EventsInIndia.com</a> site. I am happy to mention that after lots of sleepless nights, tons of coke and many keystrokes the site is done. It was significant in couple of ways.
<ul>
	<li><strong>Ruby on Rails </strong>EventsInIndia.com is developed using <a href="http://www.rubyonrails.org/">Ruby on Rails</a>. Ruby on Rails is a new technology and although it was fun to begin with  , it was hard to find answer to some cryptic questions. There were more than one cases where I was stuck for days. The mailing list was a big help and it didn't solve all the problems. In such cases I had to go back to the text book and learn ruby and try to figure out the magic that Rails was doing behind the scene. In some cases I circumvented the problem by implementing the solution in less than ideal way. In some cases I had to drop the functionality all together.Overall it was fun. I think it was a wise decision to go with RoR rather than Java. As far as this project is concerned I would have finished faster with Java but in the long run I am going to reap the benefits of having learned RoR.</li>
	<li><strong>Web design and CSS </strong>As any professional web designer will state, it's not easy getting a site that works as it was intended in different browsers. If things look fine in IE then it might not look that well in firefox. It takes a lot of effort and reading the CSS books about the many hacks to get the solution right. I would like to mention that the book <a href="http://cssmastery.com/">CSS mastery</a> was a big help. The <a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0735712018/ref=nosim/103-3772999-8110266?n=283155">web standards book by Zeldman </a>is also a good resource.</li>
	<li><strong>Designing features </strong>When you are young you have grand plans for the future. I want to add tons of features ranging from RSS feed for each location that is added to the system to the nifty usage of AJAX that will make users mind blow away. Did I mention I was young then. With a full time job you soon start getting tired of working and testing the same application time and again. It is very easy when you are working all by yourself to loose focus. It takes another pair of eyes to see the problem with the current interface. In this case I had to constantly re design the interface as the project moved further. It meant more and more repeat work. This is where RoR shined and it saved tons of time. Still it was tiring incorporating all the features and testing the system.</li>
	<li><strong>How to make money </strong>I can't get around to this question. This is what my friends are asking and I have only one answer. I don't know.</li>
	<li><strong>Aging delay</strong> I mentioned about <a href="http://neeraj.name/2006/03/13/googles-aging-delay-for-new-sites/">Google's aging delay issue</a> previously. In short Google won't index a new site for 6 to 8 months. It means EventsInIndia.com is not indexed by google.  Seeing that 86% of the traffic on this site comes from google that's going to be a bummer. There is absolutely nothing I can do about but to wait. In the meantime I will attempt to keep adding quality content to the site and hope that when google does index the site people find the site of interest.Now that I am talking about aging delay I have no choice but to mention two more sites so that they get into google's database. Hopefully six months from now these sites will be indexed. The sites are <a href="http://www.ApartmentSearchinindia.com/">ApartmentSearchInIndia.com</a> and <a href="http://indianews.fm/">IndiaNews.fm</a> .</li>
</ul> 
