---
layout: post
title: with_scope, symbol to proc and content_for
---
In case you didn't know Railscasts.com publishes free short RoR tutorials. I learned quite a few small tricks here. Highly recommended.

<strong>with_scope</strong>

<a href="http://media.railscasts.com/videos/005_using_with_scope.mov">Learn with_scope</a> in this short and sweet screencast. By using with_scope the find method becomes much more flexible and anyone can cal this method with their own options.

{% highlight ruby %}
def self.find_incomplete
    with_scope :find => options do
       find_all_by_complete(false, ;order => 'created at desc')
    end
end
{% endhighlight %}


<strong>Symbol to proc</strong>

Watch this one to learn <a href="http://media.railscasts.com/videos/006_symbol_to_proc.mov">symbol to proc</a> goodies.
Symbol to proc is something that Rails add to Ruby. Look at this code

{% highlight ruby %}@projects.collect {|p| p.name} {% endhighlight %}

The result from the above code is exactly same as

{% highlight ruby %}@projects.collect(&:name){% endhighlight %}

Symbol to proc can be applied to anything that accepts a block. This is highly useful

{% highlight ruby %}@projects.each(&:save!){% endhighlight %}


<strong>content_for</strong>

I thought I knew everything about layouts but <a href="http://www.railscasts.com/episodes/8">this screencast</a> provides a nice way of changing the content for your project using content_for. In <a href="http://www.eventsinindia.com">EventsInIndia</a> project some of the pages have auto discovery RSS code. Before I saw this screencast I have the if logic inside the head of the layout. Now that I know how to override the head values from the internal pages the code is much more modular.

{% highlight sh %}
<head>
...........
<%= yield :header_tags %>
</head>
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight ruby %}
<% content_for :header_tags do %>
     <%= auto_discovery_link_tag(:rss, {:controller => 'feeds' , :action => 'events' }) %>
<% end %>
{% endhighlight %}
