---
layout: post
title: Migrating from wordpress to Mephisto and keeping data intact
---
Any time you are migrating you application from one  platform to another you will face some challenges. Same is true is you are moving from wordpress to "Mephisto":http://mephistoblog.com/

First of all wordpress is a great tool. I mean it's the best out there. I moved out of wordpress because I want something in RoR so that I can tinker with it.

Mephisto provides some built in support to move data from wordpress to mehisto database. If you run the following script wordpress data will move to mephisto tables.

<pre>
ruby script/runner "Mephisto.convert_from :word_press" -e production
</pre>

However the data migration is not perfect.  Look at this

<pre>
# wordpress 
http://www.neeraj.name/2007/05/07/this-is-my-first-blog the mephisto
#mephisto
http://www.neeraj.name/2007/5/7/this-is-my-first-blog the mephisto
</pre>

Notice that '2007/05/07' has changed to '2007/5/7/' . It means all the links cached by search engines and the links referred by other bloggers will break. Not good. This problem can be fixed but I do not like the way link is presented. If even a single letter from this long url is missing (as is often the case with email clients who break the long uls into two separate lines) then the site will throw 404 error.

I would like to have the url of pattern http://www.neeraj.name/371/this-is-my-first-blog . In this case 371 is the primary key and the rest is the permanent link for the seo. As long as the url has 371 the page should be rendered correctly.  However this solution creates its own problems. All the old links will start failing. I decided to take this route and I had to do something about the old links.

I ended up creating a table which would map old links to the new links.

In mephisto/lib/mephisto/routing.rb I ended up adding following line

<pre>
map.connect ':year/:month/:day/*title', :controller => 'mephisto', :action => 'wplinks', :requirement => {:year => /\d+/,:month => /\d+/,:day => /\d+/ }
</pre>

In mephisto/app/controllers/mephisto_controller.rb 

<pre>
#  cached_references << (@article = site.articles.find_by_permalink(@dispatch_path.first))
    cached_references << (@article = site.articles.find_by_id(@dispatch_path.first[:id]))
</pre>

Added a new table

<pre>
ruby script/generate model wplink old_url:string new_url:string
</pre>

<pre>
#mephisto/vendor/plugins/mephisto_converters/lib/converters/base.rb#create_article(..)
#add following lines after article.save!
old_url = other_article.guid[0..-2]
new_url =  "http://neeraj.name/#{article.id}/#{article.permalink}"  #last one is a dash
Wplink.create(:old_url => old_url, :new_url=> new_url)
</pre>

Now when the data migration is done the wplinks table is properly populated.

<pre>
ruby script/runner "Mephisto.convert_from :word_press" -e production
</pre>
