---
layout: post
title: Rails does not turn column names into instance variables
---
Let's say that we have a state model. State has name and permanent_name.

Since I can do stuff like 

{% highlight ruby %}
@state = State.first
@state.name = 'foo'
@state.save
{% endhighlight %}

I thought @state would have instance variable called '@name'. But I was surprised by the result.

{% highlight ruby %}
>> @state = State.first
>> @state.instance_variables
=> ["@attributes", "@attributes_cache"]
{% endhighlight %}

So @state has only two instance variables.  Let's look inside @attributes

{% highlight ruby %}
>> @state.attributes
=> {"name"=>"New Delhi", "id"=>14, "permanent_name"=>"new-delhi"}
{% endhighlight %}

It means that if you want the value of 'name' while doing meta programming one  cannot use instance_variable_get('@name') because @state has only two instance variables and @name is not an instance variable on @state. However rails provides two utility methods read_attribute and write_attribute to handle such cases.

read_attribute and write_attribute are the methods provided by rails so that we don't need to go through @attributes. However remember that instead of read_attribute if you want to use record.instance_variable_get then you will have to get @attributes and from that you will have to get value for the key 'name' like this

{% highlight ruby %}
# using instance_variable_get
record.instance_variable_get("@attributes")['name']

# using read_attribute
record.read_attribute("#{attribute}")
{% endhighlight %}

Also note that with read_attribute we do not need to put @ sign before the attribute name which is required for instance_variable_get.

Fun stuff. Right!
