---
layout: post
title: Setting up Ruby on Rails on windows
---
I keep getting requests regarding how to get started with Ruby on Rails. Here is step by step description. 

Install ruby by downloading the exe file from "https://rubyforge.org/frs/?group_id=167":https://rubyforge.org/frs/?group_id=167
Execute the following command and you should get the version of ruby. This is ensure that ruby installation is good.

{% highlight ruby %}
ruby -v
{% endhighlight %}

Next install rails by running following command

{% highlight ruby %}
gem install -v=1.2.6 -y

# once the installation is done the execute the following command
# you should see the rails version as 1.2.6
rails -v
{% endhighlight %}

Next we need to install mysql. Go to "http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/5.0.html#win32":http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/5.0.html#win32 and download the without installer file. unzip this file at c:\

Mysql is installed. In order to start the mysql server open the command prompt and run the following command

{% highlight sh %}
C:\mysql-5-xxxxx\bin\mysqld
{% endhighlight %}

This will start mysql server. 

Now we need a mysql client. I use mysqlyog. Go to "http://webyog.com/en/downloads.php":http://webyog.com/en/downloads.php and download file "SQLyog MySQL GUI - Community Edition 6.15 (Stable)" from "Community Edition". Start mysqlyog. Click on 'new'. 

{% highlight sh %}
Host Address: 127.0.0.1
user name: root
password: leave it empty
port:3306
{% endhighlight %}

Now you can create a new database and the tables using this client.


Next we need an IDE. I use Radrails. Go to "http://www.neeraj.name/system/radrails-0.7.2-win32.zip":http://www.neeraj.name/system/radrails-0.7.2-win32.zip and download the zip file.
Unzip the file and you will see radrails.exe .


Next create a rails application. 

{% highlight sh %}
Go to d drive. 
Create a directory called dev. 
cd dev
rails demo
{% endhighlight %}

A demo project has been created.

Now let's import this project in radrails IDE. Start radrails. 

{% highlight sh %}
click on File at the top. 
click new
click on rails to expand it
click on 'rails project'
click next
put the project name as 'demo'
uncheck "default location" checkbox
uncheck "generate rails application skeleton" checkbox
check "create the webrick server"  checkbox
leave the other two checkboxes as unchecked.
click on browse 
go to demo folder and select that folder
click on finish

click on 'server' tab at the bottom right hand side.
click on 'demoServer' and then click on the start button at the right side panel in this box to start the server. 
status will change to 'starting'
status will become 'started'

Now open browser and go to http://localhost:3000 . 
You should see the Ruby on Rails homepage. It means RoR application is working fine.
{% endhighlight %}

Now you can directly start with chapter six of "Agile development with Rails (second edition)":http://www.pragprog.com/titles/rails2

Welcome to RoR world! Hope you will enjoy the journey of learning a new programming language.
