---
layout: post
title: Using Capistrano to deploy an application from github to slicehost slice
---
This article is part of a series on "Installing a ruby on rails application using phusion passenger on ubuntu on slicehost":http://neeraj.name/blog/articles/736-installing-a-ruby-on-rails-application-using-phusion-passenger-on-ubuntu-on-slicehost .

Log into github.com and create a public repository. In this case the project name is gitlearn.

On the mac machine I will create a rails application.

<pre>
rails gitlearn
cd gitlearn
git init
</pre>

<pre>
cd gitlearn
vi .gitignore
*.log
tmp/*
.DS_Store
coverage.data
coverage/*
</pre>

<pre>
cd gitlearn
capify .
mkdir config/deploy
</pre>

save the .gitignore file and exit.

<pre>
cd gitlearn
git add .
git commit -m 'first commit'

# in the following command replace neerajdotname with your userid
git remote add origin git@github.com:neerajdotname/gitlearn.git

git push origin master
</pre>

Now let's try to deploy this rails application to the slice using capistrano.

<pre>
sudo gem install capistrano
sudo gem install capistrano-ext

gem list cap
# this is what I see. You might see something different
capistrano (2.5.3, 2.3.0, 2.2.0, 2.0.0)
capistrano-ext (1.2.1, 1.2.0)
</pre>

<pre>
cd gitlearn
capify .
mkdir config/deploy
touch config/deploy/staging.rb
touch config/deploy/production.rb
</pre>

Replace the contents of config/deploy.rb, config/deploy/staging.rb and config/deploy/production.rb with the contents of 
"following file":http://gist.github.com/41716

In subversion there is something called trunk and usually there is a branch called production. In the git environment 'master' is the trunk. For production I create a branch called 'production'. Right now we are dealing with master so we will deploy to staging environment.

Execute following commands on your mac machine.

<pre>
cap staging deploy:setup
cap staging deploy:check
cap staging deploy:update_code
cap staging deploy:update
cap staging deploy
</pre>

Now your application is up and running. If you have configured phusion passenger correctly and if you have proper DNS settings then you should be able to browse the home page of your application in the browser.

If you want to deploy your application to production environment then follow "this article":http://neeraj.name/blog/articles/789-how-to-use-branch-feature-of-git-and-work-with-github .

If you want to know more about how to use git and git branching feature then "checkout this article":http://neeraj.name/blog/articles/789-how-to-use-branch-feature-of-git-and-work-with-github .

 <br />
