---
layout: post
title: Prototype stopObserving works only on same method
---
In the "previous example":http://neeraj.name/blog/articles/763-understanding-bindaseventlistener-in-prototype-framework , we saw the code for document.observe which will observe on any click made by a user. Now let's try to stop observing if certain case is met.

I am going to add code that will stop observing after the first click.

<pre>
var Developer = {
  skill: 'ruby ',
  processed: false,
  
  show_skill: function(e,start_index,end_index) {
      if (!(this.processed)) {  
         tmp2 = this.show_skill.bind(this);
         document.stopObserving('click',tmp2); 
       }

       alert(this.skill + e + '  ' + start_index + ' ' + end_index);
       this.processed = true;
  }
};


tmp1 = Developer.show_skill.bindAsEventListener(Developer,1,10);
document.observe('click',tmp1);
</pre>

The code is self explanatory. However if you run the above code it doesn't work. Document keeps observing the click even when it has been asked to stop observing.

In order for stop observing, document.stopObserving expects exactly the same method to be passed which was passed to start observation.

Problem is that every single time bind is called, it returns a new anonymous class. Simply stated tmp1 is not same as tmp2 and that's why stopObesrving is not working.

Fix would be to capture the method tmp1 somewhere and then stopObeving should receive tmp1 as input. Look at refactored code.

<pre>
var Developer = {
  skill: 'ruby ',
  processed: false,
  
  show_skill: function(e,start_index,end_index) {
      if (!(this.processed)) {  
        
         document.stopObserving('click',this.observing_object); 
       }

       alert(this.skill + e + '  ' + start_index + ' ' + end_index);
       this.processed = true;
  }
};


Developer.observing_object = Developer.show_skill.bindAsEventListener(Developer,1,10);
document.observe('click',Developer.observing_object);
</pre>

Above code stops observing clicks after the first click. <br />
