---
layout: post
title: Prompting for user input in capistrano
---
I am a big fan of "capistrano multistage":http://weblog.jamisbuck.org/2007/7/23/capistrano-multistage . In all my applications I have deploy.rb and then I have a directory ~/config/deploy.

In this directory , I usually have two files: production.rb and staging.rb .

Now when I need to deploy my code in staging I execute following command.

<pre>
cap staging deploy

# to deploy the code to production
cap production deploy
</pre>

This is all good. 

However y'day mistakenly I executed <code>cap production deploy</code> and this messed up things just a little bit. 

Since I have ssh keys setup, capistrano never prompted me for any user input. I would like capistrano to prompt me for a confirmation before any task is executed in production environment.

This is what I ended up doing. In my deploy.rb I added following lines of code at the bottom.

<pre>
before "deploy:update_code", "user_confirmation_for_production_deployment"
task :user_confirmation_for_production_deployment, roles => :app do
  if "#{stage}" == 'production'
    message = "You are deploying to PRODUCTION. continue(y/n):"
    answer = Capistrano::CLI.ui.ask(message)   
    abort "deployment to production was stopped" unless answer == 'y'
  end
end
</pre>

The code is pretty self-explanatory. You might be wondering what CLI stands for. CLI is for "Command Line Utility".

Also the ask method is not something coming from capistrano. It comes from a gem called "highline":http://highline.rubyforge.org/ .

That's it. Now I feel that I have protected myself against myself.

This code is tested with capistrano 2.5.3 . <br />
