---
layout: post
title: DNS settings on slicehost
---

This article is part of a series on "Installing a ruby on rails application using phusion passenger on ubuntu on slicehost":http://neeraj.name/2008/09/30/installing-a-ruby-on-rails-application-using-phusion-passenger-on-ubuntu-on-slicehost.html .


<h2> DNS settings </h2>

So far we have been playing with slice_ip_address but I’m sure you have bought a domain name and you want to use it.

Go https://manage.slicehost.com and login.
Click on ‘DNS tab’.
click on link ‘new domain’.
Enter ‘pageaxis.com.’ ( note that there is a dot in the end and there is no www)

click on ‘records’ link
click on ‘new record’ link
Chosse type ‘A’
Name: pageaxis.com. ( note there is a dot in the end)
Data : slice_ip_address
save

Add another record.
type: A
name: www
data: slice_ip_address
save

Go to your domain registrar(one who sold you your domain name godaddy.com , yahho.com, register.com etc) and change the dns name servers to
ns1.slicehost.net
ns2.slicehost.net
ns3.slicehost.net

Some registrars allow only two name servers. In that case do not add ns3 and don’t panick. Two of them works fine too.

<h3> Add NS records </h3>

I am not sure why but it is recommended to setup NS records. If your registrar allowed 3 name servers in the previous step then you need to add three records or just addd two records.

*new record*

type: NS

name: pageaxis.com. ( note dot in the end )

data: ns1.slicehost.net. ( note dot in the end )

save



*new record*

type: NS

name: pageaxis.com. ( note dot in the end )

data: ns2.slicehost.net. ( note dot in the end )

save


*new record*

type: NS

name: pageaxis.com. ( note dot in the end )

data: ns3.slicehost.net. ( note dot in the end )

save

<h3> Subdomains </h3>
Let’s say that you want http://blog.pageaxis.com . In that case following DNS entry needs to be made.

*new record*

type: A

name: blog

data: slice_ip_address

save

<h3>DNS propogation </h3>


It may take anywhere between 24 and 72 hours for this change to propogate. To find out if the the change has propogate through or not go to
"http://network-tools.com/default.asp?prog=trace&host=www.pageaxis.com":http://network-tools.com/default.asp?prog=trace&host=www.pageaxis.com  ( change www.pageaxis.com to www.yourdomain.com)
Go to the bottom of the page. If the last hop is slicehost then you are all set. Otherwise continue to wait. In some cases it might take more than 72 hours for the change to propage.

It is also a good idea to read about dig to make sure that there is no typo mistake done before applying the changes at the registrar. Lear more about dig at "http://articles.slicehost.com/2007/10/8/introduction-to-dig":http://articles.slicehost.com/2007/10/8/introduction-to-dig
 <br />
