---
layout: post
title: Installing mod rails on slicehost slice
---
This article is part of a series on "Installing a ruby on rails application using phusion passenger on ubuntu on slicehost":http://neeraj.name/blog/articles/736-installing-a-ruby-on-rails-application-using-phusion-passenger-on-ubuntu-on-slicehost .


<h2> Installing mod_rails </h2>
Follow the instructions mentioned "here":http://articles.slicehost.com/2008/5/1/ubuntu-hardy-mod_rails-installation to install mod_rails and to install your application. 

This article links to "another article":http://articles.slicehost.com/2008/5/1/ubuntu-hardy-using-mod_rails-to-serve-your-application describing how to setup your rails application to mod_rails. The process suggested in this article works fine as long as you have setup only one domain. If you have more than one domain then things fall apart. For example I had www.neeraj.name and www.pageaxis.com and I ran into trouble. Only one domain was working. To get around to that problem follow the instruction mentioned below.

First make sure that you have enabled anysite by command

{% highlight sh %}
sudo a2ensite testapp
{% endhighlight %}

then remove that by executing following command

{% highlight sh %}
sudo a2dissite testapp
{% endhighlight %}

Now go and take a look at /etc/apache2/sites-enabled . This directory should be empty.

{% highlight sh %}
sudo vi /etc/apache2/apache2.conf

# go to the bottom of this file and add following lines

NameVirtualHost 67.207.136.195:80

<VirtualHost 67.207.136.195:80>
ServerName pageaxis.com
ServerAlias www.pageaxis.com
DocumentRoot /home/neeraj/apps/pageaxis/current/public
#RailsEnv development
RailsEnv production
</VirtualHost>

<VirtualHost 67.207.136.195:80>
ServerName neeraj.name
ServerAlias www.neeraj.name
DocumentRoot /home/neeraj/apps/rollmyblog/current/public
</VirtualHost>

{% endhighlight %}

Make sure that you replace 67.207.136.195 by the ip address of your slice box.
