---
layout: post
title: polymorphic paths are nicer and underused
---
Since Rails is fully behind RESTful resources, I guess most of use try to create restful resources. Creating a restful resource is easy.

<pre>
ruby script/generate scaffold Event name:string descrition:string start_date:datetime
</pre>

Once the resource is restful we can do things like

<pre>
  map.resources :events

  @event = Event.first
  redirect_to event_path(@event)
</pre>

This is great but there is a way to further simplify this. 

<pre>
  # before
  redirect_to event_path(@event)

 # after
  redirect_to @event
</pre>

That's much easy. We can also do

<pre>
  # before
 link_to @event.name, event_path(@event)

 # after
 link_to @event.name, @event
</pre>

However the question is how does Rails decipher that @event in some cases is equivalent to event_path(@event).

Here is the code in Rails that does this magic.

<pre>
  # actionpack/lib/action_controller/base.rb
      def url_for(options = nil) #:doc:
        case options || {}
          when String
            options
          when Hash
            @url.rewrite(rewrite_options(options))
          else
            polymorphic_url(options)
        end
      end
</pre>

Notice that if the input option is not a String or a Hash , control goes to polymorphic_url . That's the one that is doing all the magic.

polymorphic_url is capable of a lot of wonderful things.  Below I am going to past code that is taken from "this blog":http://railspikes.com/2008/4/23/5-useful-underused-methods

<pre>
# Before:
<% if @record.is_a?(User) %>
<%= user_path(@record) %>
<% elsif @record.is_a?(Friend)
<%= friend_path(@record) %>
 ... etc.

# After:
<%= polymorphic_path(@record) %>


# Paths can be namespaced:
#=> admin/users/5/edit
edit_polymorphic_path([:admin, @record])

  # builds a form with an action to 'new_admin_stores_path'
#=> <form action="admin/stores/new" ... />
form_for([:admin, Store.new])
</pre>

polymorphic_url is a wonderful thing. Now when I write code I try to remember to write redirect_to @event instead of redirect_to event_path(@event).
