---
layout: post
title: Simple shell scripts I use
---

Given below are the four useful scripts when I use time to time.

I created  a directory called 'scripts' .

{% highlight sh %}
mkdir ~/scripts
{% endhighlight %}
 
h2. gemmate

I use this script to look at the source code of any gem. You can type gemmate rails and then hit tab and the script will try to autocomplete.

Save the following file as <code>~/scripts/gemmate</code> . Notice there is no extension.

{% highlight sh %}
#!/bin/sh

# Usage: gemmate activerec[tab]
# Source: http://effectif.com:8000/2008/3/29/opening-ruby-gems-in-textmate
usage()
{
     echo "Usage: $(basename $0) <gem>" 1>&2
     exit 1
}

GEM="$1"

[ -z "$GEM" ] && usage
mate "$(gem environment gemdir)/gems/$GEM"
{% endhighlight %}


h2. ipfor

This is used to get ip address for a url.  Save the following file as <code>~/scripts/ipfor</code>

{% highlight sh %}
#!/usr/bin/env ruby
require 'resolv'

unless ARGV.size == 1
  puts "-> Usage: ipfor www.rollstream.com" 
  exit
end

# only works on mac
def paste(str)
  %x[echo "#{str}" | pbcopy]
  puts "-> Pasted #{str} to your clipboard" 
end

begin
  paste(Resolv.getaddress(ARGV.first))
rescue Resolv::ResolvError
  puts "-> Could not resolve '#{ARGV.first}'" 
end
{% endhighlight %}

h2. myip_from_inside

This is used to get the ipaddress of my machine from inside. Save this file as <code>~/scripts/myip_from_inside</code>

{% highlight sh %}
#http://www.askdavetaylor.com/how_do_i_figure_out_my_ip_address_on_a_mac.html
ifconfig | grep "inet " | grep -v 127.0.0.1 | cut -d\  -f2
{% endhighlight %}

h2. myip_from_outside

This is used to get the ipaddress of my machine from outside. Save this file as <code>~/scripts/myip_from_outside</code>

{% highlight sh %}
# the script is being displayed in two lines. You should put
# them in one single line
curl -s http://checkip.dyndns.org | awk '{print $6}' | awk ' BEGIN { FS = "<" } { print $1 } '
{% endhighlight %}

Now let's add scripts directory to the path . Go to command prompt and execute following commands

{% highlight sh %}
touch ~/.bash_profile
echo 'export PATH=$PATH:~/scripts' >> ~/.bash_profile
chmod x ~/scripts/*
{% endhighlight %}

Now close all shells. Start a new shell and you should be able to use these shell commands. <br />
