---
layout: post
title: Event propagation and peventDefault
---
Let's look at sample html.

<pre>
<div id='parent'>
  Languages
  <p>Java</p>
  <p>Javascript</p>
</div>
</pre>

And here is the javascript code. Run the code with jQuery-1.3.2 .

<pre>
$(document).ready(function(){
  $('#parent').click(function(){
    alert('parent was clicked');  
  });
  $('#parent p').click(function(){
    alert('p was clicked');  
  });
});
</pre>

When you click on 'Java' then you will get two alerts. That is because the click on element p will propagate outward and it will be caught by element div which has onclick trigger. 

If you do not want the event to propagate then here is a way to stop it.

<pre>
$(document).ready(function(){
  $('#parent').click(function(){
    alert('parent was clicked');  
  });
  $('#parent p').click(function(e){
    alert('p was clicked');  
    e.stopPropagation();
  });
});
</pre>

h2. Stopping the default behavior

Converting a regular html link into an AJAX request is easy. One of the things you need to do is to <tt>return false</tt> so that the click operation does not perform its default behavior.

<pre>
$('a').bind('click',function(){
   alert('clicked');
   return false;
});
</pre>

However there is another way to handle such cases. <tt>preventDefault</tt> stops the default behavior. The same code could be written as

<pre>
$('a').bind('click',function(e){
   e.preventDefault();
   alert('clicked');
});
</pre>

<i>Not sure why but I have noticed that e.preventDefault() should be the first line in the function. If I switch the order of e.preventDefault and alert message in the above javascript then it does not work in Firefox/mac.</i><br />
