---
layout: post
title: Integrating JavaScriptLint with mvim and getting rid of annoying warnings
---
I use "JavaScriptLint":http://www.javascriptlint.com along with "JavaScriptLint.vim":http://www.vim.org/scripts/script.php?script_id=2578 on mvim to catch any JavaScript syntax error or missing semicolons. It works great except in cases when I am chaining methods like this.

{% highlight js %}
var select_col1 = $('<select></select>')
  .addClass('ram_drop_down')
  .addClass('ram_drop_down_col1')
  .attr('name','adv_search['+random_num+'_row][col1]')
  .attr('id',random_num+'_ram_drop_down_col1');
{% endhighlight %}

In such cases JavaScriptLint had warnings for me.

{% highlight sh %}
unexpected end of line. It is ambiguous whether these lines are part of the same statment.
{% endhighlight %}

JavaScriptLint wants me to put the dot at the end of the line and not at the beginning of the line. Well, I like having dots at the beginning of lines and I wanted to turn off such warning.

JavaScriptLint comes with a default config file. I copied the config file to a personal directory and disabled the warning.

{% highlight sh %}
before: +ambiguous_newline 
after: -ambiguous_newline
{% endhighlight %}

Also I had to comment out <tt>+process jsl-test.js</tt> at the very bottom. Now tell your plugin to to use this configuration file rather than the default one. Add the following line to your vimrc file.

{% highlight sh %}
let jslint_command_options = '-conf "/Users/neeraj/vim/plugin/jslint/jsl.custom.conf" -nofilelisting -nocontext -nosummary -nologo -process'
{% endhighlight %}

"This is the vim settings":http://github.com/neerajdotname/vim/tree/master I use and it has been configured to take care of it. Just go to <tt>vimrc.local</tt> and change the path to your config file. Also don't forget to remove <tt>"</tt> at the beginning of the line to uncomment it.<br />
