---
layout: post
title: Where is ruby installed? Where are gems installed?
---
h2. Where is ruby installed on my machine?

irb can help you.

{% highlight ruby %}
>  irb  -rrbconfig 
>> Config::CONFIG["bindir"] 
=> "/System/Library/Frameworks/Ruby.framework/Versions/1.8/usr/bin"
{% endhighlight %}

That's a tough one. I could never remember that.

A much easier way is 

{% highlight ruby %}
> gem env
RubyGems Environment:
  - RUBYGEMS VERSION: 1.3.1
  - RUBY VERSION: 1.8.6 (2008-03-03 patchlevel 114) [universal-darwin9.0]
  - INSTALLATION DIRECTORY: /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
  - RUBY EXECUTABLE: /System/Library/Frameworks/Ruby.framework/Versions/1.8/usr/bin/ruby
  - EXECUTABLE DIRECTORY: /usr/bin
  - RUBYGEMS PLATFORMS:
    - ruby
    - universal-darwin-9
  - GEM PATHS:
     - /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
     - /Users/nkumar/.gem/ruby/1.8
     - /System/Library/Frameworks/Ruby.framework/Versions/1.8/usr/lib/ruby/gems/1.8
  - GEM CONFIGURATION:
     - :update_sources => true
     - :verbose => true
     - :benchmark => false
     - :backtrace => false
     - :bulk_threshold => 1000
     - :sources => ["http://gems.rubyforge.org/", "http://gems.github.com", "http://gems.github.com"]
  - REMOTE SOURCES:
     - http://gems.rubyforge.org/
     - http://gems.github.com
     - http://gems.github.com
{% endhighlight %}

This is much better. Just run <tt>gem env</tt> and you will get <tt>RUBY EXECUTABLE</tt> which lists where ruby is running from.

<tt>gem env</tt> is also a good way to find out location of your gems. Above <tt> GEM PATHS</tt> lists the path where gems are installed.


h2.  Where is a specific gem installed

If you are interested in finding where a particular gem is installed then run following command. It lists the location of the gem also.

> gem list -d rails

*** LOCAL GEMS ***

rails (2.2.2, 2.2.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.1, 2.1.0, 2.0.2, 2.0.1, 1.2.6, 1.2.5)
    Author: David Heinemeier Hansson
    Rubyforge: http://rubyforge.org/projects/rails
    Homepage: http://www.rubyonrails.org
    Installed at (2.2.2): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (2.2.1): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (2.1.2): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (2.1.1): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (2.1.0): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (2.0.2): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (2.0.1): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (1.2.6): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8
                 (1.2.5): /Library/Ruby/Gems/1.8

