---
layout: post
title: Fixing ActiveRecord  Base.all and making it friendlier to named_scope
---

__Following code has been tested with Rails 2.3 .__

Search feature of this blog is powered by following named_scope.

<pre>
named_scope :search, lambda { |search_term|
   { :conditions => ["title LIKE :search_term or body LIKE :search_term", { :search_term => "%#{search_term}%"} ]  }
}
</pre>

I want to search for all <tt>sinatra</tt> related articles.

<pre>
>> Article.search('sinatra')
SELECT * FROM `articles` WHERE (title LIKE '%sinatra%' or body LIKE '%sinatra%') 
</pre>

I want to search for all articles in <tt>published</tt> status.

<pre>
>> Article.all(:conditions => {:status => 'published'})
SELECT * FROM `articles` WHERE (`articles`.`status` = 'published') 
</pre>

Now I want to combine the above two requirements: search for 'sinatra' related articles which are in 'published' status. Should be easy, Right.

<pre>
>> Article.all(:conditions => {:status => 'published'}).search('sinatra')
NoMethodError: undefined method `search' for #<Array:0x22bbdd8>
</pre>

Now try the same search as above in reverse order: put named_scope 'search' first and then apply 'all'.

<pre>
>> Article.search('sinatra').all(:conditions => {:status => 'published'})
SELECT * FROM `articles` WHERE (`articles`.`status` = 'published') AND (title LIKE '%sinatra%' or body LIKE '%sinatra%') 
</pre>

This one worked. Why is that?

That's because <tt>ActiveRecord::Base.all</tt> method is defined like this

<pre>
def all(*args)
  find(:all, *args)
end
</pre>


So the main problem is that <tt>all</tt> is not a named_scope. And since it is not a named_scope  <tt>Article.all(:conditions => {:status => 'published'}).search('sinatra')</tt> failed.


Fix is to create a named_scope called <tt>all</tt>.

<pre>
module ActiveRecord
   class Base
      named_scope :all, lambda { |args| args ||= {} }
   end
end
</pre>

Now the order does not matter and you can use <tt>all</tt> any way you please.<br />
