---
layout: post
title: git
permalink: git.html
published: false
---

##git add##

    # add in interative style
    git add -p [--patch]                        

    # add only the file git already knows about. will ignore new files
    git add -u                             

    # dry run
    git add -n                             

##git blame##

git blame helps you identify the author of each line of code.

###common usage###

    (master)$ git blame config/environment.rb 
    49b8798d (Neeraj Singh  2010-03-17 17:09:24 -0400   1) # Copyright neeraj
    49b8798d (Neeraj Singh  2010-03-17 17:09:24 -0400   2) 
    ^08dfbff (John Doe      2009-11-25 10:39:05 -0500   3) # Be sure to restart your server when you modify this file
    ^08dfbff (John Doe      2009-11-25 10:39:05 -0500   4) 
    ^08dfbff (John Doe      2009-11-25 10:39:05 -0500   5) # Specifies gem version of Rails to use when vendor/rails is no
    647bdb7f (John Doe      2009-11-30 18:50:01 -0500   6) RAILS_GEM_VERSION = '2.3.5' unless defined? RAILS_GEM_VERSION

You can see that first two lines were changed by Neeraj. Rest of the lines were committed by John Doe. Some of the commits by John Doe have commit SHA1_HASH starting with <tt>^</tt>. In this context a <tt>^</tt> indicates that the corresponding line is part of very first initial commit.

###other usage###

    # display the same information as mentioned above. Howeve show 40 digit SHA1_HASH
    git blame -l foo.txt                
    
    git blame -L 40,60 foo.txt          # show blame info only for line numbers between 40 and 60
    git blame -L 40,+21 foo.txt         # show blame info for 21 lines after line number 40

##git branch##

    git branch                    # list all local branches and indicate which branch I am currently in
    git branch -v                 # all branch info with last commit
    git branch -a                 # list all local and remote branches
    git branch -r                 # list only the remote branches ( does not include local branches)
    git branch --no-merged        # list all the branches from which merge is yet to be done
    git branch --merged           # list all the branches which are already merged

##git cat-file##

Lists info about a commit.

    $ git cat-file -p 092b81b
    tree c77ac2b94a50da5ff3b54a6ec3e0be6eac536ee3
    parent 721f6bc7a9ee16a9dc244ddbc21f63c296ab9173
    author Neeraj Singh <neeraj.cmu@gmail.com> 1269944652 -0400
    committer Neeraj Singh <neeraj.cmu@gmail.com> 1269944652 -0400

    fixed jQuery bug

    $ git cat-file -t SHA1_HASH        # type of commit: commit or tree
    commit

##git checkout##

###create a branch###

    git co -b lab master^    # create a branch from one commit prior to master branch
    git co -b lab SHA1       # create a branch from a particular commit hash
    git co -b lab v0.1.27    # create a branch from a tag
    git co -b lab            # create a new branch called lab and switch to that branch
    git co -b lab origin/lab # pull a remote branch called lab

    git tag -l
    git co tag_name          # will checkout the whole repository for that tag



### when file and branch name is same###

Let's say that I have a file called lab and I have a branch called lab.

    git co -- lab       # this will act on file named lab
    git co ./lab        # this will act of file named lab
    git co lab          # this will act on branch named lab

###checking out a particular file###

    git co experiment -- app.js      # bring app.js from experiment branch to current branch
    git co v1.2.3 -- app.js          # bring app.js from tag v1.2.3
    git co origin/master -- app.js   # bring app.js from remote branch master
    git co HEAD -- app.js            # bring app.js from current HEAD
    git co HEAD^ -- app.js           # bring app.js from the version before the most recent commit

###reset everything or reset a file###

Get rid of all the working and staged changes from the current branch.

    git reset --hard HEAD # reset --hard is a dangerous operation. If mistakenly you 
                          # did reset --hard HEAD^ then you loose a commit
    git co -f             # this is a safer option 

    got co app.js         # get rid of local changes in app.js and reset it from current HEAD
    git co -f lab         # discard all the changes in the current branch and switch 
                          # to lab branch. this is same as git co -f; git co lab

##git cherry-pick##

I have committed something in lab branch which I want in master branch too. In this case I want to bring only a commit from lab branch to master.

    git cherry-pick SHA1_HASH


##git clean##

git clean deletes untracked files .

    # -d removes untracked directories in addition to untracked files.
    # -f force
    # -x do not use ignore rules. This allows removing all untracked files
    # -X remove only files ignored by git
    git clean -n -d

##git commit##

    git commit -v  # add diff to the commit message. You still need to provide message using -m but
                   # but this adds the whole diff to the commit message after your message


##git config##

Use global option to change global setting. Execute the command without --global option inside a project to change the setting for just that project.

    git config --global user.name "Neeraj Singh"
    git config --global user.email neerajdotname@gmail.com
    git config --global core.editor mate
    git config --global color.ui "auto"
    git config --global alias.co checkout
    git config --global alias.st status

    git config -l (--list) # list the git configuration. If executed within a git project
                           # then it takes into account project level settings. Otherwise
                           # it shows global settings

    cat ~/.gitconfig       # raw output of global config 

    git config --unset --global user.name        # use --unset option to remove a setting

###Change setting only for a project###

    git config user.name 'John doe2'
    git config user.email 'john@doe2.com'
    cat .git/config       # raw output of config information for this project


##git describe##

git describe finds the nearest tag that is reachable from a commit.

    git describe --all 84554be
    tags/c2-1-g84554be

##git diff##

    git diff                            # diff from index
    git diff --cached                   # diff between HEAD and staged
    git diff HEAD                       # git diff + git diff --cached
    git diff --unified=10               # by default the diff shows 2 lines above and below. 
                                        # To have 10 lines above and below use --unified option
    git diff lib
    git diff master~2                   # show diff between current version and master~2 version
    git diff master~2 lib               # show diff for all files in lib directory

    git diff --name-only                # list only the names of the file impacted in the relevant committs
    git diff --name-status              # list only the name and the status of the file impacted
    git diff --stat                     # show the stat of the files changed 
    git diff master~10 master~3 foo.txt # show diff between two paricular points for a particular file
    git diff master~3 foo.txt           # show difference between current state and the last three commits for foo.txt

    git diff master lab foo.txt         # show difference between foo.txt of master branch and lab branch
                                        # + means extra line in lab branch foo.txt




##git fsck##

Every single time you do git add, a blob is created for all changed file. Now if you don't commit and make some further changes to the files and then you do git add, then new blobs are created. If you commit now then commit will refer to the blobs created second time.

What happens to the blobs that were created the first time. Well they are there just dangling. No one can reach them and they are of no use.

git fsck identifies those blobs.

    $ git fsck
    dangling commit 7281251ddd2a61e38657c827739c57015671a6b3
    dangling commit 2706a059f258c6b245f298dc4ff2ccd30ec21a63
    dangling commit 13472b7c4b80851a1bc551779171dcb03655e9b5
    dangling blob 218761f9d90712d37a9c5e36f406f92202db07eb
    dangling commit bf093535a34a4d35731aa2bd90fe6b176302f14f
    dangling commit 8e4bec7f2ddaa268bef999853c25755452100f8e
    dangling tree d50bb86186bf27b681d25af89d3b5b68382e4085
    dangling tree b24c2473f1fd3d91352a624795be026d64c8841f


##git prune##

git fsck lists dangling objects. git prune will delete dangling objects.

    git prune      # remove all dangling objects
    git fsck       # now the result of git fsck should be empty


##git gc##

    git gc                # cleanup unnecessary files and optimize the local repository
    git gc --no-prune     # do not prune dangling objects
    git gc --prune=<date> # prune loose objects older than date (default is 2 weeks ago). It means object 
                          # dangling objects older than 2 weeks get cleaned up by gc in default mode


##git push##

    git push origin lab  # create a new remote branch called lab
    git push --all       # creates new branches on remote server for all local branches and pushes 
                         # all local branches to server

    git push origin :lab # delete remote branch lab

##git rebase##
gii rebase is useful not only for rebasing stuff from other branches but also squashing various commits into a single commit in a branch. git rebase also provides an option to split a single commit into two.

    git rebase -i HEAD~2 #will let merge last two commits into a single commit.


##git remote##

git remote             # check if this project is attached any remote git server or not
git remote -v          # information about remote server
git remote show origin # lists all the remote branches and lists which local branch pushes to which remote branch
                       # also lists which one is current and which one is not



##git reset##

    git reset --soft HEAD^     # undo the last commit and keep the changes in the working tree
    git reset --hard HEAD^     # get rid of last commit
    git reset --hard SHA1_HASH # reset to to a particular commit. It will get rid of all the committs after this commit
    git reset --hard HEAD      # Reset all the local changes
    git reset HEAD foo.txt     # unstage a staged file


###Getting rid of certain committs ###

I have five commits I want to totally discard last two commits and start from third.

    # display last 5 commits
    > git log -n 5 --pretty=oneline                
    47fe5e36d5f5591e2d1a9d5f700187371e70fe8f c5
    4e00ed451fa677f66a674925e51162c022a4e8a5 c4
    53954a12d9f9cde98a2cab8bd90812c6cd36a990 c3
    031b16d70b8e2a3b7d2238afd36bcd0743ab67d8 c2
    4988ee1b65a33e003d8177708b769cf55727dc88 c1

Perform reset

    git reset --hard 53954a12d9f9cde98a2cab8bd90812c6cd36a990 (SHA1-HASH of c3)
    HEAD is now at 53954a1 c3

    # notice that c4 and c5 are gone from the log
    > git log -n 5 --pretty=oneline                  
    53954a12d9f9cde98a2cab8bd90812c6cd36a990 c3
    031b16d70b8e2a3b7d2238afd36bcd0743ab67d8 c2
    4988ee1b65a33e003d8177708b769cf55727dc88 c1
    235b6272e18c6d2fb75c98f73e09c16fad777f0d master
    0505f0202025c2d948416ca00f903b22182b190a done

##git rev-parse##

This method is used to get the longer 40 digit commit SHA1_HASH. 

    git rev-parse --verify master
    git rev-parse --verify lab
    git rev-parse --verify origin/master
    git rev-parse --verify origin/lab
    git rev-prase --verify v1.25                 

    git rev-parse --verify 54dedfd                  # find the longer version of the commit SHA1_HASH
    git rev-parse --verify master~4

The [documentation of rev-parse](http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-rev-parse.html) has a nice diagram illustrating the caret and how to travel to father and grand father.

##git merge##

    git merge --squash staging        # In squashed merge all the commits from staging would appear as one 
                                      # single commit in master branch.
                                      # Note that squash merge operations leaves the changes in working 
                                      # directory. You need to commit the changes yourself.

##git merge-base##

This command helps find command ancestor between multiple committs.  Let's say that you want to know the last common committ between master and lab branch then the command would be

    git merge-base master lab


##git revert##

git revert reverts a commit. However changes are reverted by making anothe commit which is opposite of what was committed.

    git revert SHA1_HASH
    git revert --no-commit SHA1_HASH   # revert a commit but do not commit the revert commit
    git revert --no-edit               # do not prompt for the commit message. Just add revert to the beginning
                                       # of the commit message being reverted and commit this change


##git rm##

    # remove a file from repository but keep it in the working directory.
    # after this operation foo.txt will become untracked file
    git rm --cached foo.txt


##git show-branch##

    # show branches and display more info about them
    git show-branch 

    # show branches and display more info about them also lists directories from remote
    git show-branch -a

##git show-ref##

    $ git show-ref -h      # show references for both heads and tags 
    f7b97abf2c8e8c0d7aa03bf933ad35ad7cccde91 HEAD
    a8690311e955c98318e04d0d97f1dda3c0afa3be refs/heads/lab
    f7b97abf2c8e8c0d7aa03bf933ad35ad7cccde91 refs/heads/master
    f7b97abf2c8e8c0d7aa03bf933ad35ad7cccde91 refs/remotes/origin/HEAD
    7f086d8f86905a7eb73bf0ad53acbeba3a9938ff refs/remotes/origin/lab
    b5dd18af699e5399fe74b3461e9e18698e35a93f refs/tags/v0.1.23
    ee5eb3e761ef4c85e8d0bb6ea8c3d4a87bdc10df refs/tags/v0.1.24

    git show-ref --heads # only heads no tags
    git show-ref --tags  # only tags no heads

##git show##

git show can be used to get more info about a commit or a file.

    git show HEAD                                  # information about last commit
    git show SHA1_HASH                             # information about a commit
    git show --name-only SHA1_HASH                 # list all the files changed in a commit

    # it takes --pretty option
    git show --pretty=medium --name-only SHA1_HASH 

    git show origin/experiment:foo.txt             # see the contents of a remote file
    git show v1.25:foo.txt                         # see the content of a file from a tag


##git tag##

    git tag v0.1.27               # tag the current state with v0.1.27
    git push --tags               # push all created tags to remote server
    git push origin --tags        # push all created tags to remote server (same as above command)
    git tag -l                    # list all available tags
    git tag v0.1.19 SHA1_HASH     # git allows you to create a tag for a commit that was done in the past.




















































































##git log##

    git log -n 2                           # show log for last two committs
    git log -p -n 2                        # show the patch along with log info
    git log --name-only -n 2               # list all the files involved in the committs
    git log --name-status -n 2             # list all the files involved in the commits. also show status of the file name
    git log --stat -n 2                    # list all the files changed and next to each file show a 
                                           # stat of how many lines were added and how many were removed
    git log --pretty=oneline               # log info in one line
    git log --pretty=oneline foo.txt       # list all committs in which foo.txt was involved
    git log master..lab                    # list all committs which are in lab but not in master 
    git log v1.1..                         # lists all the committs since tag v1.1

    git log --stat master..lab             # along with committs list stat of changed files 
    git log --shortstat                    # commit info with shortstat
    git log --stat                         # commit info with stat
    git log --since="3 weeks"
    git log --no-merges                    # do not list logs from merges 
    git log --abbrev-commit                # make the commit name short

    git log --pretty=oneline --graph --all # text based graph

    git log -Sgit_rocks                    # look for string git_rocks in all diff of all the committs
    git log -Sror_rocks foo.txt            # look for string git_rocks in all diff of foo.txt

    git log master..lab                    # committs reachable from lab but not from master
    git log lab..master                    # committs reachable from master but not from lab

##git ls-file##

This command shows information about file from index. ls stands for list reference.

    rm foo.txt
    git ls-files --deleted    # this will list foo.txt

    git ls-files -t           # show the status of the each listed file


##git ls-remote##

Show information about remote.

    $ git ls-remote origin                    # all remote branches and remote tags and their SHA1_HASH

    43a61f4049e5c4f492b7d66ef1d19909e30eda3c	HEAD
    43a61f4049e5c4f492b7d66ef1d19909e30eda3c	refs/heads/master
    43a61f4049e5c4f492b7d66ef1d19909e30eda3c	refs/heads/production
    47b5986e5851190b3e1b9489866f85ab4b12164a	refs/heads/staging
    987efd16e9dc20ba44c19ce1313b4e5997404567	refs/tags/v1.1
    7a3319ba72b670c830a01cf07654c470ea66e3a7	refs/tags/v1.2

    git ls-remote --tags origin               # lists only tags  no heads
    git ls-remote --heads origin              # lists only heads no tags

##git ls-tree##

git ls-tree -r HEAD       # lists each and every single file and directory of the project and SHA1_HASH
git ls-tree HEAD lib/*.rb # lists all the .rb files in lib directory and SHA1_HASH of each file


##git name-rev##

I want to know where a commit is in a branch or not.

    git name-rev 33db5f4d9027a10e477ccf054b2c1ab94f74c85a
    33db5f4d9027a10e477ccf054b2c1ab94f74c85a tags/v0.99~940

That tells me that the commit happpend 940 revisions before v0.99 .

##git branch --contains##

Closely similar to git name-rev is the need to find all the branches that contains a SHA!_HASH.

This filters the lists of branches to only those which have the given commit among their ancestors. To also include remote tracking branches in the list, include the "-a" flag.

    $ git branch --contains 50f3754



##Show the last commit which message matches a regex##

    # shows the last commit which has the word "fix" in its message
    $ git show :/fix

    # shows the last merge commit
    $ git show :/^Merge



## Sometimes I get this message: You have local changes to [file]; cannot switch branches. However sometimes I am able to switch to a different branch with local changes.##

I have one single file <tt>foo.txt</tt> .

    $ git co -b lab
    $ git co master
    $ echo "Hello World" > foo.txt

    $ git status
    modified foo.txt

Now try switching to lab branch. Note that my foo.txt is in modified state.

    $ git co lab  
    Switched to lab

In the above case I am able to checkout lab. That is because the checked in file foo.txt is same in both master and in lab.

Now commit the change in master branch.

    $ git co master
    git add .
    git commit -m 'changed foo'

Now I have committed a change in foo.txt in master. So now there is a difference between foo.txt of master and foo.txt of lab.

Now change something in foo.txt and do not stage it. And then try switching the branch.

    $ echo change something2 > foo.txt
    $ git co lab
    error: You have local changes to 'foo.txt'; cannot switch branches.

So in summary git complains only if the committed verion of the changed file is different between the two branches. 

One way to find diff between two branches for a file is
    git diff master lab foo.txt




## Give me list of all the committs not yet pushed to remote##

    # tbd explain both + and - sign
    git cherry -v origin/master master

## I did rm -rf lib instead of git rm -rf##

    git ls-files --deleted | xargs git rm

##What is the difference between double dot and triple dot##

There is a difference between <tt>git diff master..lab</tt> and <tt>git diff master...lab</tt> .

Assume that there are two branches: master and lab. And this is the current status.

    A - B - C - D - E (master)
             \
              \
                F - G (lab)

Result of <tt>git diff master..lab</tt> will look at committs (D and E) and will diff that against (F and G).

The <tt>git diff master...lab</tt> will not even look at D and E. Triple dot version will take ( F and G) and it will diff that against common ancestor (C). 

Triple dot version is a good way to find out what all changed in a branch since it was branched off. Once again git won't even look at commit D and E in case of triple dot diff.


##Why finding all the committs which changed a file is so slow##


git log provides <tt>git log  README.md</tt> which will list all committs which changed README.md file. It is useful tool but <tt>git log</tt> is slow. Why is this command peforms so slow so to do with the way git stores files. 

git does not track changes at a file level. When git log README.md command is issued, git has to check with every single commit in the repository to find if a commit changed a file or not. Basically git runs following command on every single commit and hence it is slow.

    git show --name-only SHA1_HASH

git show --name-only lists all the files changed in a given commit.

"reference":https://git.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/GitFaq#Why_is_.22git_log_.3Cfilename.3E.22_slow.3F

##How do I look at the previous version of a file##

If you just want to look at a previous version of file then git show will do the job.

    git show v1.15:README.md

If you want to replace current file with previous file then use git checkout.

    git co v1.15:README.md


##How do I recover deleted file##

    rm foo.txt              # delete a file
    git co foo.txt          # recover the deleted file

    git rm foo.txt          # git delete a file
    git reset HEAD foo.txt  # recover that file


List of files deletede using rm can be found using git ls-files

    rm *.txt                     # delete all files with extension .txt
    git ls-files --deleted (-d)  # get the list of files deleted from index


##Resolving a conflict in merge or rebase for one single file##

You are doing either rebase or merge and you have a conflict. It is a complicted conflict and all you want is your version to take precedence over the branch stuff. Use <tt>--ours</tt> option.

    git checkout --ours README.md
    git add README.md
    git diff # to go to the next conflicting file
 
In the above case the merged version will have README.md from master branch.

Similary if I want their version to take precedence then the command would be as given below. I read somewhere that this option is getting deprecated.

    git checkout --theirs README.md


##I want to split last commit into two separate committ. However I have already pushed to remote the changes##

###Rewriting History###

One way to fix this problem is to get rid of last commit like this.

    git reset HEAD^

Now make changes to README.md

    git add README.md
    git commit -m 'changed README.md'

Using above technique last commit was dropped off of HEAD. A new commit was created. However if you try to push your changes git will reject it because you just rewrote history. If you still want to push it then you need to use --force. 

    git push --force

This technique is error prone because if someone makes a branch off of your last commit and then if you rewrite history it will create all sorts of problem. 

###Do not rewrite history###

Here create another commit that will undo of the last commit. And then undo that commit.

    git revert --no-edit HEAD
    git revert --no-edit HEAD

Now I am at the same point where I started except that I can reset HEAD because the last two committs are private to me. Now you can do this.

    git reset HEAD^

Make changes to README.md

    git add README.md
    git commit -m 'fixed README.md without rewriting history'


##If I do git pull what committs will be pulled in##

Use git log or git diff to find the difference between two branches. However when you are using double dots then make sure that you are using the right order.

    git log master..lab # show all extra committs from lab which are missing in master
    git log lab..master # show all extra committs from master which are missing in lab

    git fetch
    git log master..origin/master # show all committs that would be merged if I do git pull
    git log origin/master..master # show all committs that would be pushed if I go git push

Note that I did get fetch before doing and comparison with remote branch. git fetch is needed because git does not actually reach out to remote branch to do comparison. It compares against a local index which mimicks what is on remote branch. Performing git fetch updates that local index that mimicks remote branch.

##I am not able to do git pull on a branch I created##

When I create a branch based off of a branch that already exists remotely then the command I use is

git co -t origin/feature9

Above command not only creates a branch but also sets up remote tracking which allows me to do git push and git pull without any extra argument.

Now I am creating a new branch.

    git co -b feature10

I can do git push to push the changes to remote.

    git push origin feature10

However now if I do git pull then I will get error.

    $ git pull

    You asked me to pull without telling me which branch you
    want to merge with, and 'branch.today9.merge' in
    your configuration file does not tell me, either. Please
    specify which branch you want to use on the command line and
    try again (e.g. 'git pull <repository> <refspec>').
    See git-pull(1) for details.

    If you often merge with the same branch, you may want to
    use something like the following in your configuration file:

        [branch "today9"]
        remote = <nickname>
        merge = <remote-ref>

        [remote "<nickname>"]
        url = <url>
        fetch = <refspec>

    See git-config(1) for details.


One way is to delete and the create branch again. Since a remote branch called feature10 has already been crated. I delete my branch and then I create a new branch using <tt>-t</tt> option.

git branch -D feature10 # delete my local branch feature10
git branch -t origin/feature10 #now create the branch again

A better solution is to set tracking when the branch is pushed to remote the very first time.

    git push -u origin feature10

Now git pull will work fine since tracking has been setup.


## What is detached head##

Certain operations will put you in no branch. In this branch which is no branch you can do  your experiment like adding a few commits etc. When you get out of branch then all those  changes are discarded. 

    git co v1.25          # checkout tag v1.25
    git co master^        # parent of master
    git co HEAD~2         # grandparent of current HEAD
    git co origin/master  # checkout a remote branch

Let's say that you checkoued tag v1.25 . You have been placed in no branch. In this branch you did some development and liked your work. You would like to preverse your work. If you checkout to master then all your work will be lost. In this case you can checkout a new branch as given below and all your work will be preserved.

    git co -b quick_sort

##What is Fast forward merge##

Usually when a merge happens then a commit has two parents. However if the lab branch has certain number of committs and master had no commit then in this case git would just fast forward and the merged commit would have only one parent.

    git co -b lab
    echo 'testing fast forward' > foo.txt
    git add foo.txt; git commit -m 'testing fast forward'
    git co master
    git merge lab

Now see the last commit in gitk. You will see that last commit has only one parent. And that is becase git did fast forward which is the default behavior.

However I can ask git to create a commit with two parents and not to do fast forward. Just replace the last command with this one

    git merge --no-ff


##Why git is not allowing me to delete branch##

Sometimes git -d feature10 fails.

Let's say that you are in master branch. Create a new branch called lab. Change someting in lab branch and commit the change. Now come back to master branch and try to delete lab branch.

    git branch -d lab

You will get following error message .

    error: The branch 'lab' is not an ancestor of your current HEAD.
    If you are sure you want to delete it, run 'git branch -D lab'.

The delete failed. It failed because git is telling you that if you delete lab branch then you will some loose information. What information will be lost can be found out by asking git what commits master is missing.

Basically I am asking git tell me what commits are there in lab branch which in not there in master branch. That can be found by following command.

    git log master..lab --pretty=oneline
    d2525457e73591bb4b8ed2a6546c978de574b00b added copyright message

lab branch has that 'copyright message' change which is not there in master branch.

One way to fix this issue would be to bring that commit into master. Or if you do not need that change then as git suggested pass <tt>-D</tt> option.

    git branch -D experiment


## When I never use git stash##

Problem with stash is that I forget that I have stashed something. Here is another technique that I have been using and it has been working out quite well for me.

I learned this technique from "http://henrik.nyh.se/2009/02/git-reset-soft-as-stash-replacement-and-undo":http://henrik.nyh.se/2009/02/git-reset-soft-as-stash-replacement-and-undo . In stead of git statsh I just commit with message WIP.

    git commit -m 'wip'

When I come back to continue the work I see that last mesage was WIP. Then I the following and I get my changes in staged area.

    git reset --soft HEAD^ 

or 

    git reset HEAD^

Be very careful with the above operation. If mistakenly instead of soft you typed hard then you will loose the most recent commit.  


##How git works##

###git has index###

Unlike cvs or svn git has index that is in between user and the final code base. When you do git add then you are adding to the index. When you commit then git does following things.

* git compares the commit state of the index and the current state of index. By doing the diff, git finds list of all the file that are new, changed or deleted.

* git creates new blob for every single new file.

* git creates new blob for every single changed file.

* git updates the index marking that all those files have been committed.

Notice that git does not store diff. git creates a new blob of the full file every single time a file changes. Every single time a new blob is created a new tree is also created. To that tree this new blob is attached. This tree attaches old blobs for the file that did not change.


###How HEAD is tracked###

HEAD tells which branch you are currently in.

Curretly I am in master branch.

    $ cat .git/HEAD
    ref: refs/heads/master

Now I will switch to lab branch and notice the new value of HEAD.

    $ git co lab
    Switched to branch 'lab'

    $ cat .git/HEAD
    ref: refs/heads/lab

There is a command to change HEAD which could be used if I am writing a script.

    $ git symbolic-ref HEAD refs/heads/lab  # change HEAD to lab branch

###When you commit then HEAD changes###

HEAD points to a branch. When a commit is made in that branch then file .git/refs/heads/[branch_name] gets updated with the last commit SHA1_HASH .

You can update the branch HEAD with new commit SHA1_HASH yourself like this

    echo 5f1bc85745dcccce6121494fdd37658cb4ad441f > .git/refs/heads/master

There is a git command for perforoming the same task

    git update-ref refs/heads/master 5f1bc85745dcccce6121494fdd37658cb4ad441f

##What gets stored at .git/objects##

git stores the 40 digit SHA1_HASH of the content as the file name. For foo.txt if the 40 char hash is 16ffbb1d57bfbf28a5b4da9ea71faf1c73b92272 then this content would be stored at below mentioned location. Notice that first two characters are taken for directory name and rest 38 characters are the file name for the object.
 
    .git/objects/16/ffbb1d57bfbf28a5b4da9ea71faf1c73b92272 

If you cat this file then you will see garbage. However you can  run below command to see the content

    git cat-file -p 16ffbb1d57bfbf28a5b4da9ea71faf1c73b92272

A tree contains the information that maps a blob to a file. The tree itself is also stored at .git/objects .

    $ git count-objects 
    36
    $ echo I am foo > foo.txt
    $ git add foo.txt

    $ git count-objects
    37

    $ git commit -m 'adding foo.txt'
    $ git count-objects
    39

After committing the number of count-objects increased by two: one was a commit object itself and the second was a tree object.

###.gitignore###

.gitignore file can be in any directory. If you want to ignore something local to youself then use .git/info/exclude

##index##

The index is found in .git/index and keeps track of file pathnames and corresponding blobs. Each time you run commands such as git add, git rm, or git mv, git updates the index with the new pathname and blob information.

A branch in git is nothing more than a file in .git/refs/heads


##git push by default pushes all the branches. Don't do that##

git push will by default push all branches that have the same name on the remote. To limit this behavior to just the current branch, set this configuration option:

    $ git config --global push.default tracking


##How do I create a new branch from a remote branch##

    git co -t origin/feature9


##Set --rebase option##

Setup rebase for every tracking branch.

    $ git config --global branch.autosetuprebase always

make `git pull` on master always use rebase

    $ git config branch.master.rebase true


##I forked rails. How do I bring new changes to rails to my forked repository##

    $ git clone git@github.com:neerajdotname/rails.git
    $ cd rails
    a git remote add --track master upstream git://github.com/rails/rails.git

In the above case I am tracking master branch and I have named this remote repo as 'upstream'.

Now git remote should show two items

    $ git remote
    origin
    upstream

Now to bring changes from upstream do

    $ git fetch upstream # creates a remote repository 'upstream/master'
    $ git merge upstream/master

or

    $ git pull upstream master


##How do I diff my branch against other branches##

To compare against master do

    https://github.com/neerajdotname/rails/compare/master...experiment

To compare against rails master do

    https://github.com/neerajdotname/rails/compare/rails:master...neerajdotname:experiment


##How do I find who added or changed this line of code##

    git log -S"some code line" README.md 


### Reference: ###

* [http://sitaramc.github.com/concepts/detached-head.html](http://sitaramc.github.com/concepts/detached-head.html)
* [http://longair.net/blog/2009/04/16/git-fetch-and-merge](http://longair.net/blog/2009/04/16/git-fetch-and-merge)
* [http://mislav.uniqpath.com/2010/07/git-tips](http://mislav.uniqpath.com/2010/07/git-tips)
* [http://osteele.com/archives/2008/05/my-git-workflow](http://osteele.com/archives/2008/05/my-git-workflow)
* [http://tomayko.com/writings/the-thing-about-git](http://tomayko.com/writings/the-thing-about-git)
* [http://blog.experimentalworks.net/2009/03/merge-vs-rebase-a-deep-dive-into-the-mysteries-of-revision-control](http://blog.experimentalworks.net/2009/03/merge-vs-rebase-a-deep-dive-into-the-mysteries-of-revision-control)
* [tag with datetime](http://posterous.timocracy.com/tagging-a-git-release-with-current-branch-nam?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed:+timocracy+(a+timocracy+of+one)
* [http://eagain.net/articles/git-for-computer-scientists](http://eagain.net/articles/git-for-computer-scientists)
