---
layout: post
title: JavaScript fundamentals quiz
---

JavaScript has many quirks and one can create a number of quizzes based on those quirks. Following sets of quizzes will not test your understanding of those quirks. Rather these questions will test your understanding of fundamental JavaScript. Here we go.

h2. Question 1

<pre>
var x = 10;
 
function foo() {
  var x = 30;
  console.log(x);
}
 
(function () {
  var x = 20;
  foo(); 
})();
</pre>

h2. Question 2

<pre>
function foo() {

  var x = 10;
  var y = 20;
 
  return function () {
    console.log([x, y]);
  };
 
}
 
var x = 30;

var bar = foo(); 

bar(); 
</pre>

h2. Question3

<pre>
console.log(a); 
console.log(b); 

var a = 'hello world';
b = 'I am global';
</pre>

h2. Question 4

<pre>
var data = [];
 
for (var k = 0; k < 3; k++) {
  data[k] = function () {
    console.log(k);
  };
}

data[0]();
data[1]();
data[2]();
</pre>

h2. Question 5

Is JavaScript pass by reference or pass by value?

<pre>
var x = 10;
var y = x;
x = 20;
console.log(y);
</pre>

h2. Question 6

Is JavaScript pass by reference or pass by value?

<pre>
var x = {hello: 'world'};
var y = x;
x = {good: 'bye'};
console.log(y);
</pre>


h2. Question 7

<pre>
function funky(o) {
  o = null;
}

var x = 10;
funky(x);
console.log(x);
</pre>

h2. Question 8

Same as question 6 except that this time x is not an integer but an object.

<pre>
function funky(o) {
  o = null;
}

var x = {hello: 'world'};
funky(x);
console.log(x);
</pre>


h2. Question 9

Is JavaScript pass by reference or pass by value?

<pre>
function swap(a,b) {
  var t = a;
  a = b;
  b = t;
}

var x=1, y=2;

swap(x,y)

console.log(x)
</pre>

h2. Question 10

<pre>
var x = "test";
console.log( x.foo );

x.foo = 12;
console.log( x.foo );
</pre>

h2. Question 11

Notice that function bar is defined after the return statement.

<pre>
function foo(){
  console.log(z);
  console.log(bar());
  console.log(bazz());
  return true;

  function bar(){
    return 'this is bar';
  };

  var bazz = function(){
     return 'this is bazz';
  };

  var z = 'zzz';
};

foo();
</pre>

h2. Question 12

<pre>
for(var i=1; i < 5; i++){
 setInterval(function(){
    console.log(i);
  }, 2000);
}
</pre>

In the above case do you expect to see values printed on console immediately or each number will get printed after an interval of 2 seconds.

h2. Question 13

<pre>
var foo = { 
    toString: function () { 
        return "foo"; 
    }, 
    valueOf: function () { 
        return 5; 
    } 
}; 
 
alert(foo + "bar"); // 5bar 
alert([foo, "bar"].join("")); // foobar
</pre>

"Ref":http://www.adequatelygood.com/2010/3/Object-to-Primitive-Conversions-in-JavaScript

h2. Answer next week

I will write a long blog next week explaining the answers.
